Propose process for allowing external links (#5757)
ethereum/EIPs: EIPS/eip-5757.md

> ---

Reviewer: EIPW says you are missing a Security Considerations section.

So that this can be merged faster I suggest you add one ;)

Author: I'm going to add this EIP to the unchecked list.

 - **Resource**: A web page, document, file, or other media that contains content.
 - **Source**: A publisher/chronicler of resources, like a standards body (eg. w3c) or a system of referring to documents (eg. Digital Object Identifier System).

### Requirements for Sources

Permissible sources **SHOULD NOT** obviously allow redistributing their resources as part of the EIP repository. If a source does obviously allow redistribution of resources, include those resources in an appropriate directory within this repository and link to those copies instead. The common exception to this rule are git repositories under the Ethereum organization.

Permissible sources **MUST** provide a method of uniquely identifying a particular revision of a resource. Examples of such methods may include git commit hashes, version numbers, or publication dates.

Permissible sources **MUST** have a proven history of availability. A source existing for at least ten years and reliably serving resources would be sufficient—but not necessary—to satisfy this requirement.

> Permissible sources **MUST NOT** charge a fee for accessing resources.

Reviewer 2: I love the intention but I think this block us from many academic publications. ISO standards are also charging fees. 
```suggestion
WHEN available, author **MUST** choose free permissible sources over non-free permissible sources.

WHEN available, author **MUST** choose least restricting copyright licensed sources over more restricted copyright licensed sources 
```

Author: I am fine without allowing links to those sources.

Reviewer: I strongly disagree. The accessibility of science suffers from non-free publications. One should not have to dox oneself and have a payment method such as a credit or debit card.

What is written is what I'm happy with. I will not currently accept anything less.

Reviewer 2: But one could not distribute books for free due to copyright reason, meaning we can't cite most of the published books. Is this what we intend for?

Reviewer: Yes. This would be an unfortunate side effect.

### Source Removal

Any approved source that ceases to satisfy the above requirements **MUST** be removed from [EIP-1](./eip-1.md), and its proposal (as described below) **MUST** be moved to a `status` of `Draft` or `Withdrawn`.

Finalized EIPs (eg. those in the `Final` or `Withdrawn` statuses) **SHOULD NOT** be updated to remove links to these sources.

Non-Finalized EIPs **MUST** remove links to these sources before changing statuses.

### Source Approval

#### Proposal

> Each potential permitted source **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.

Reviewer: How about this:
```suggestion
Each potential category of permitted sources **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.
```

Author: What is a category of sources? Like "all books"?

Reviewer: Yes.

Reviewer: Things like "sources that require payments MUST NOT be allowed." This doesn't describe a single source, yet according to this proposal must belong in its own EIP.

Also, most people think of a source as a single work; for example, a scientific article is a source, but the journal itself isn't.

Author: Hm... yeah that makes sense. The other word I was considering was "publisher", but that seems too restrictive and easy to mix up with the terminology from books.

I do define source and resource in the definitions section, if that makes any difference.

What term would you prefer I use instead of "source"?

Reviewer: I also noticed the word `permitted`. I think that it should be removed, as "no source can be paid" wouldn't be "permitting" sources, it would be denying them.

I think that any of the following is acceptable:
```suggestion
The rules regarding each potential category of sources **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.
```
```suggestion
The rules regarding each potential collection of sources **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.
```
If we want to get mathematical:
```suggestion
The rules regarding each potential set of sources **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.
```

> Each potential permitted source **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.

Reviewer 2: This is probably too hard to add a new source. And the granularity can be a debatable issue too.

Author: I've added a note to the rationale.

These EIPs **MUST** describe how the source meets the requirements described above.

These EIPs **MUST** include the markup for creating a link that satisfies all the above requirements and an example of such a link.

When opened, these EIPs:

 - **MUST** have a `status` of `Draft`.

Throughout their lifetime, these EIPs:

 - **MUST** have a `type` of `Meta`;
 - **MUST** have a `title` beginning with `External Source - ` followed by a unique name describing the source; and
 - **MAY** include links to any resources relevant to the approval process (regardless of source).

> [A template for these proposals is available](../assets/eip-5757/template.md).

Reviewer: I think in order to make this work we have to implement #4335 first.

Author: > That list will be extremely long.

I sincerely hope not :rofl:

Reviewer: At the current rate of things, it'll probably be easier to do taxes than figure out if an external link is allowed.

#### Review

> Should the editors determine that a source meets the requirements above, its proposal **SHALL** be granted a `status` of `Living`, and EIP-1 **MUST** be updated to show the new source.

Reviewer: Why not Final?

EDIT: Please disregard.

## Rationale

### Redistribution

It is much easier to meet the process' goals for immutability if the resource is subject to this repository's tooling. Likewise, it is much easier to ensure availability if the resources are distributed alongside their EIPs. Therefore, if a source allows it, prefer redistribution in this repository.

### Unique Identifiers

If it is impossible to uniquely identify a version of a resource, it becomes impractical to track changes, which makes it difficult to ensure immutability.

### Availability

If it is possible to implement a standard without a linked resource, then the linked resource is unnecessary. If it is impossible to implement a standard without a linked resource, then that resource must be available for implementers.

### Free Access

> The Ethereum ecosystem is built on openness and free access, and the EIP process should follow those principles.

Reviewer: You do bring up good points here. But the ISP 'acess cost' here suffers from the sunk cost fallacy. You're paying $30/day (which, I will admit, is a **lot**), even if you don't use it. Having already paid the bill, it costs you nothing to use your service.

In terms of ads and all that stuff--you do bring up a good point and I agree that we should discourage articles that contain ads or trackers.

### `Living` Status

> The internet is not an immutable space, as much as this process attempts to assert that it is. External source EIPs are given the `Living` status because their link formats, markup, and justification may change over time, while `Final` proposals cannot be modified.

Reviewer: Disregard my above comment.

Permissible origins **MUST NOT** charge a fee for accessing resources.

### Origin Removal

Any approved origin that ceases to satisfy the above requirements **MUST** be removed from [EIP-1](./eip-1.md). If a removed origin later satisfies the requirements again, it MAY be re-approved by creating a new EIP as described in [Origin Approval](#origin-approval).

Finalized EIPs (eg. those in the `Final` or `Withdrawn` statuses) **SHOULD NOT** be updated to remove links to these origins.

Non-Finalized EIPs **MUST** remove links to these origins before changing statuses.

### Origin Approval

#### Proposal

Each potential permitted origin **SHALL** be described in its own EIP.

These EIPs **MUST** describe how the origin meets the requirements described above.

These EIPs **MUST** include the markup for creating a link that satisfies all the above requirements and an example of such a link.

When opened, these EIPs:

 - **MUST** have a `status` of `Draft`.

Throughout their lifetime, these EIPs:

>  - **MUST** have a `type` of `Meta`;

Reviewer: How about we add a `category` for `Meta` EIPs?

Author: That would certainly be better than a special title prefix.

The Ethereum ecosystem is built on openness and free access, and the EIP process should follow those principles.

### One Origin per Proposal

Adding any origin is likely to be contentious and involve long debate. If each origin is proposed in its own EIP, they each will get a `discussions-to` link to focus and preserve discussion.

## Copyright

> Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Copyright and related rights waived via [CC0](../LICENSE.md).
```
